.. role:: raw-html-m2r(raw)
   :format: html


Metadata v3
========

Meta V3 is a REST API Microservice for MongoDB which provides server-side Data, Identity and Access Management for Web and Mobile applications.

-----------------
Overview
-----------------
Meta V3 is:

A Stateless Microservice.
With Meta V3 projects can focus on building Angular or other frontend applications, because most of the server-side
logic necessary to manage database operations, authentication / authorization and related APIs is automatically handled,
without the need to write any server-side code except for the UX/UI.

For example, to insert data into MongoDB a developer has to just create client-side JSON documents and then execute POST operations via HTTP to Meta V3.
Other functions of a modern MongoDB installation like flexible schema, geoJson and aggregation pipelines ease the development process.

Every tenant will have access to at least one database where they can store and manage json documents. Documents are the trailing end
of a nested hierarchy of data that begins with a database that houses one or more collections. The collections house json documents
the structure of which is left up to the administrators of the tenant database.

Permissions for access to databases, collections and documents must be predefined before accessing those resources. The definitions
for access are defined within the Security Kernel API of Tapis V3 and must be added by a tenant or service administrator.
See the Permissions section below for some examples of permissions definitions and access to resources in the Meta V3 API.

--------------------------------
Getting Started
--------------------------------

Create a document
-----------------
We have a database named MyTstDB and a collection name MyCollection. To add a json document to MyCollection, we can do the following:


With CURL:

.. code-block:: plaintext

        $ curl -v -X POST -H "Content-Type:application/json"  -H "X-Tapis-Token:$jwt" --data '{"name": "test document slt 7.21.2020-14:27","jimmyList": ["1","3"],"description": "new whatever",}'  $BASE_URL/v3/meta/MyTstDB/MyCollection?basic=true

The response will have an empty response body with a status code of 201 "Created" unless the "basic" url query parameter is set to true.
Setting the "basic" parameter to true will give a Tapis Basic response along with the "_id" of the newly created document. A more detailed discussion
of autogenerated ids and specified ids can be found in the "Create Document" section of "Document Resources".

.. container:: foldable

     .. code-block:: json

        {
          "result": {
            "_id": "5f189316e37f7b5a692285f3"
          },
          "status": "201",
          "message": "Created",
          "version": "0.0.1"
        }


List documents
---------------
Using our MyTstDb/MyCollection resources we can ask for a default list of documents in MongoDB default sorted order. The document we created earlier
should be listed with a new "_id" field that was autogenerated by MongoDB.

With CURL:

.. code-block:: plaintext

        $ curl -v -X GET -H "Content-Type:application/json"  -H "X-Tapis-Token:$jwt" $BASE_URL/v3/meta/MyTstDB/MyCollection

The response will be an array of json documents from MyCollection :

.. container:: foldable

     .. code-block:: json

        [
          {
            "_id": {
              "$oid": "5f189316e37f7b5a692285f3"
            },
            "name": "test document slt 7.21.2020-14:27",
            "jimmyList": [
              "1",
              "3"
            ],
            "description": "new whatever",
            "_etag": {
              "$oid": "5f189316296c81742a6a3e4c"
            }
          },
          {
            "_id": {
              "$oid": "5f1892ece37f7b5a692285e9"
            },
            "name": "test document slt 7.21.2020-14:25",
            "jimmyList": [
              "1",
              "3"
            ],
            "description": "new whatever",
            "_etag": {
              "$oid": "5f1892ec296c81742a6a3e4b"
            }
          }
        ]


Get a document
---------------
If we know the "_id" of a created document, we can ask for it directly.

With CURL:

.. code-block:: plaintext

        $ curl -v -X GET -H "Content-Type:application/json"  -H "X-Tapis-Token:$jwt" $BASE_URL/v3/meta/MyTstDB/MyCollection/5f1892ece37f7b5a692285e9

The response will be a json document from MyCollection with the "_id" of 5f1892ece37f7b5a692285e9 :

.. container:: foldable

     .. code-block:: json

        {
          "_id": {
            "$oid": "5f1892ece37f7b5a692285e9"
          },
          "name": "test document slt 7.21.2020-14:25",
          "jimmyList": [
            "1",
            "3"
          ],
          "description": "new whatever",
          "_etag": {
            "$oid": "5f1892ec296c81742a6a3e4b"
          }
        }

Find a document
---------------
We can pass a query parameter named "filter" and set the value to a json MongoDB query document. Let's find a document by a specific "name".

With CURL:

.. code-block:: plaintext

        $ curl -v -X GET -H "Content-Type:application/json" -H "X-Tapis-Token:$jwt" --data-urlencode filter='{"name": "test document slt 7.21.2020-14:25"}' $BASE_URL/v3/meta/MyTstDB/MyCollection

The response will be an array of json documents from MyCollection :

.. container:: foldable

     .. code-block:: json

        [
          {
            "_id": {
              "$oid": "5f1892ece37f7b5a692285e9"
            },
            "name": "test document slt 7.21.2020-14:25",
            "jimmyList": [
              "1",
              "3"
            ],
            "description": "new whatever",
            "_etag": {
              "$oid": "5f1892ec296c81742a6a3e4b"
            }
          }
        ]


---------
Resources
---------
General resources
-----------------
An unauthenticated Health check is in included in the Meta V3 API to let any user know the current condition of the service.

**Health Check**

An unauthenticated request for the health status of Meta V3 API.

With CURL:

.. code-block:: plaintext

        $ curl -v -X GET -H "Content-Type:application/json" $BASE_URL/v3/meta/

The response will be a Basic Tapis response on health:

.. container:: foldable

     .. code-block:: json

        {
          "result": "",
          "status": "200",
          "message": "OK",
          "version": "0.0.1"
        }


Root resources
--------------
The Root resource space represents the root namespace for databases on the MongoDb host. All databases are located here.
Requests to this space are limited to READ only for tenant administrators.

**List DB Names**

A request to the Root resource will list Database names found on the server. This request has been limited to those users with tenant administrative roles.

With CURL:

.. code-block:: plaintext

        $ curl -v -X GET -H "Content-Type:application/json"  -H "X-Tapis-Token:$jwt" $BASE_URL/v3/meta/

The response will a json list of database names:

.. container:: foldable

     .. code-block:: json

        [
            "StreamsDevDB",
            "v1airr"
        ]

Database resources
------------------
The Database resource is the top level for many tenant projects. The resource maps directly to a MongoDb named database in the database server.
Case matters for matching the name of the database and must be specified when making requests for collections or documents. Currently

**List Collection Names**

This request will return a list of collection names from the specified database {db}. The permissions for access to the
database are set prior to access.


With CURL:

.. code-block:: plaintext

        $ curl -v -X GET -H "Content-Type:application/json"  -H "X-Tapis-Token:$jwt" -d '' $BASE_URL/v3/meta/{db}

Here is an example response:

.. container:: foldable

     .. code-block:: json

        [
          "streams_alerts_metadata",
          "streams_channel_metadata",
          "streams_instrument_index",
          "streams_project_metadata",
          "streams_templates_metadata",
          "tapisKapa-local"
        ]


**Get DB Metadata**

This request will return the metadata properties associated with the database. The core server generates an etag in the _properties collection for a database
that is necessary for future deletion.


With CURL:

.. code-block:: plaintext

        $ curl -v -X GET -H "Content-Type:application/json"  -H "X-Tapis-Token:$jwt" -d '' $BASE_URL/v3/meta/{db}/_meta

Here is an example response:

.. container:: foldable

     .. code-block:: json

        {
           "_id": "_meta",
           "_etag": { "$oid": "5ef6232b296c81742a6a3e02" }
        }



**Create DB**

TODO: this implementation is not exposed. Creation of a database by tenant administrators is scheduled for inclusion in
an administrative interface API in a future release.

This request will create a new named database in the MongoDb root space by a tenant or service administrator.


With CURL:

.. code-block:: plaintext

        $ curl -v -X PUT -H "Content-Type:application/json"  -H "X-Tapis-Token:$jwt" -d '' $BASE_URL/v3/meta/{db}

Here is an example response:

.. container:: foldable

     .. code-block:: json

        { }


**Delete a DB**
TODO: this implementation is not exposed. Deletion of a database by tenant administrators is scheduled for inclusion in
an administrative interface API in a future release.

This request will delete a named database in the MongoDb root space by a tenant or service administrator.



With CURL:

.. code-block:: plaintext

        $ curl -v -X DELETE -H "Content-Type:application/json"  -H "X-Tapis-Token:$jwt" -d '' $BASE_URL/v3/meta/{db}

Here is an example response:

.. container:: foldable

     .. code-block:: json

     { }


Collection Resources
--------------------
The Collection resource allows requests for managing and querying json documents within a MongoDB collection.

**Create a Collection**

You can create a new collection of documents by specifying a collection name under a specific database. /v3/meta/{db}/{collection}


With CURL:

.. code-block:: plaintext

        $ curl -v -X PUT -H "Content-Type:application/json"  -H "X-Tapis-Token:$jwt" $BASE_URL/v3/meta/{db}/{collection}

Here is an example response:

.. container:: foldable

     .. code-block:: json

        Empty response with HTTP status of 201

**List Documents**

A default number of documents found in the collection are returned in an array of documents.


With CURL:

.. code-block:: plaintext

        $ curl -v -X GET -H "Content-Type:application/json"  -H "X-Tapis-Token:$jwt" -d '' $BASE_URL/v3/meta/{db}/{collection}

The response will look like the following:

.. container:: foldable

     .. code-block:: json

        [
          {
            "_id": {
              "$oid": "5f1892ece37f7b5a692285e9"
            },
            "name": "test document slt 7.21.2020-14:25",
            "description": "new whatever",
            "_etag": {
              "$oid": "5f1892ec296c81742a6a3e4b"
            }
          },
          {
            "_id": {
              "$oid": "5f1892ece37f7b5a69228533"
            },
            "name": "test document slt 7.21.2020-14:25",
            "description": "new whatever",
            "_etag": {
              "$oid": "5f1892ec296c81742a6a3e444"
            }
          }
        ]


**List Documents Large Query**

A default number of documents found in the collection are returned in an array of documents.


With CURL:

.. code-block:: plaintext

        $ curl -v -X GET -H "Content-Type:application/json"  -H "X-Tapis-Token:$jwt" -d @FILENAME '' $BASE_URL/v3/meta/{db}/{collection}/_filter

The response will look like the following:

.. container:: foldable

     .. code-block:: json

        [
          {
            "_id": {
              "$oid": "5f1892ece37f7b5a692285e9"
            },
            "name": "test document slt 7.21.2020-14:25",
            "description": "new whatever",
            "_etag": {
              "$oid": "5f1892ec296c81742a6a3e4b"
            }
          },
          {
            "_id": {
              "$oid": "5f1892ece37f7b5a69228533"
            },
            "name": "test document slt 7.21.2020-14:25",
            "description": "new whatever",
            "_etag": {
              "$oid": "5f1892ec296c81742a6a3e444"
            }
          }
        ]


**Delete a Collection**

This administrative method is only available to tenant or meta administrators and requires an If-Match header parameter of the Etag for
the collection. The Etag value, if not already known, can be retrieved from the "_meta" call for a collection.


With CURL:

.. code-block:: plaintext

        $ curl -v -X DELETE -H "Content-Type:application/json"  -H "X-Tapis-Token:$jwt" $BASE_URL/v3/meta/{db}/{collection}

Here is an example response:

.. container:: foldable

     .. code-block:: json

        Empty response body with status code 204

**Get Collection Size**

You can find the given size or number of documents in a given collection by calling "_size" on a collection.


With CURL:

.. code-block:: plaintext

        $ curl -v -X GET -H "Content-Type:application/json"  -H "X-Tapis-Token:$jwt" $BASE_URL/v3/meta/{db}/{collection}/_size

Here is an example response:

.. container:: foldable

     .. code-block:: json

        TODO


**Get Collection Metadata**

You can find the metadata properties of a given collection by calling "_meta" on a collection. This would include the Etag value for a collection
that is needed for deletion.


With CURL:

.. code-block:: plaintext

        $ curl -v -X GET -H "Content-Type:application/json"  -H "X-Tapis-Token:$jwt" $BASE_URL/v3/meta/{db}/{collection}/_meta

Here is an example response:

.. container:: foldable

     .. code-block:: json

        {
          "_id": "_meta",
          "_etag": {
            "$oid": "5f2b2b7a204ce7637579c85f"
          }
        }


Document Resources
------------------
Document resources are json documents found in a collection. Reading, creating, deleting and updating documents along with batch
processing make up the operations that can be applied to documents in a collection. There various ways to retrieve one or more documents from a collection,
including using a filter query parameter and value in the form of a MongoDB query document. Batch addition of documents, as well as, batch updates based on
queries is also allowed.

**Create a Document**

Creating a new document within a collection. Submitting a json document within the request body of a POST request will create a new document
within the specified collection with a MongoDB autogenerated "_id". Batch document addition is possible by POSTing an array of new documents
with a request body for the specified collection. The rules for "_id" creation operates the same way on multiple documents as they do with a single
document.

The default representation returned is an empty response body along with a 201 Http status code "Created". However if an additional query
parameter named "basic" is added with the value of "true" a basic Tapis response is returned along with the newly created "_id" of the document.



With CURL:

.. code-block:: plaintext

        $ curl -v -X POST -H "Content-Type:application/json"  -H "X-Tapis-Token:$jwt" -d '{"docName":"test doc"}' $BASE_URL/v3/meta/{db}/{collection}

Here is an example response:

.. container:: foldable

     .. code-block:: json

        Empty response

Multiple documents can be added to a collection by POSTing a json array of documents. The batch addition of documents only supports the default response.


With CURL:

.. code-block:: plaintext

        $ curl -v -X POST -H "Content-Type:application/json"  -H "X-Tapis-Token:$jwt" -d '[{"docName":"test doc1"},{"docName":"test doc2"}]' $BASE_URL/v3/meta/{db}/{collection}

The response body will be empty:

.. container:: foldable

     .. code-block:: json
        TODO


**Get a Document**

Get a specific document by its "_id".


With CURL:

.. code-block:: plaintext

        $ curl -v -X GET -H "Content-Type:application/json"  -H "X-Tapis-Token:$jwt"  $BASE_URL/v3/meta/{db}/{collection}/{document_id}

The response will be the standard json response:

.. container:: foldable

     .. code-block:: json

        {
            "_id"}

**Replace a Document**

This call replaces an existing document identified by document id  ("_id"), with the json supplied in the request body.


With CURL:

.. code-block:: plaintext

        $ curl -v -X PUT -H "Content-Type:application/json"  -H "X-Tapis-Token:$jwt" -d '{"docName":"test doc another one"}' $BASE_URL/v3/meta/{db}/{collection}/{document_id}

Here is an example response:

.. container:: foldable

     .. code-block:: json

        TODO


**Modify a Document**

This call will replace a portion of a document identified by document id ("_id") with the supplied json.


With CURL:

.. code-block:: plaintext

        $ curl -v -X PATCH -H "Content-Type:application/json"  -H "X-Tapis-Token:$jwt" -d '{"docName":"test changed"}' $BASE_URL/v3/meta/{db}/{collection}/{document_id}

Here is an example response:

.. container:: foldable

     .. code-block:: json

        TODO


**Delete Document**

Deleting a document with a specific document id ("_id"), removes it from the collection.


With CURL:

.. code-block:: plaintext

        $ curl -v -X DELETE -H "Content-Type:application/json"  -H "X-Tapis-Token:$jwt" -d '' $BASE_URL/v3/meta/{db}/{collection}/{document_id}

Here is an example response:

.. container:: foldable

     .. code-block:: json

        TODO


Index Resources
---------------
Indexes can help speed up queries of your collection and the API gives you the ability to define and manage your indexes.
You can create an index for a collection, list indexes for a collection and delete an index. Indexes can't be updated they
must be deleted and recreated.

**List Indexes**

List the indexes defined for a collection.


With CURL:

.. code-block:: plaintext

        $ curl -v -X POST -H "Content-Type:application/json"  -H "X-Tapis-Token:$jwt"  $BASE_URL/v3/meta/{db}/{collection}/_indexes

Here is an example response:

.. container:: foldable

     .. code-block:: json

        TODO

**Create Index**

Create a new Index with a new name. To create an index you have to specify the keys and the index options.
Let's create an unique, sparse index on property qty and name our index "qtyIndex".

PUT /v3/meta/{db}/{collection}/_indexes/qtyIndex

.. code-block:: json

   {"keys": {"qty": 1},"ops": {"unique": true, "sparse": true }}



With CURL:

.. code-block:: plaintext

        $ curl -v -X PUT -H "Content-Type:application/json"  -H "X-Tapis-Token:$jwt" -d '{ "keys":  <keys>, "ops": <options> }' $BASE_URL/v3/meta/{db}/{collection}/_indexes/{indexName}

Here is an example response:

.. container:: foldable

     .. code-block:: json

        TODO

**Delete Index**

Remove a named Index from the index list.



With CURL:

.. code-block:: plaintext

        $ curl -v -X DELETE -H "Content-Type:application/json"  -H "X-Tapis-Token:$jwt" $BASE_URL/v3/meta/{db}/{collection}/_indexes/{indexName}

Here is an example response:

.. container:: foldable

     .. code-block:: json

        TODO

Aggregation Resources
---------------------
Aggregations operations process data records and return computed results. Aggregation operations group values from
multiple documents together, and can perform a variety of operations on the grouped data to return a single result.
Aggregations in the API are predefined and added to a collections properties. They may also be parameterized for use
with multiple sets of inputs.

**Create an Aggregation**

Create an aggregation pipeline by adding the aggregation to the collection for future execution. The aggregation may have
variables that are defined so that a future request may pass variable values for aggregation execution. See "Execute an Aggregation".

.. code-block:: json

    { "aggrs" : [
          { "stages" : [ { "$match" : { "name" : { "$var" : "n" } } },
                { "$group" : { "_id" : "$name",
                      "avg_age" : { "$avg" : "$age" }
                    } }
              ],
            "type" : "pipeline",
            "uri" : "example-pipeline"
          }
        ]
    }

+------------+---------------+-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| Property   | Mandatory     | Description                                                                               |
+============+===============+===========================================================================================+
| type       | yes           | - for aggregation pipeline operations is "pipeline"                                       |
+------------+---------------+-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| uri        | yes           | - specifies the URI when the operation is bound under the path /<db>/<collection>/_aggrs. |
+------------+---------------+-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| stages     | yes           | - the MongoDB aggregation pipeline stages.                                                |
+------------+---------------+-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+

For more information refer to https://docs.mongodb.org/manual/core/aggregation-pipeline/


With CURL:

.. code-block:: plaintext

        $ curl -v -X PUT -H "Content-Type:application/json"  -H "X-Tapis-Token:$jwt"
             -d '{ "aggrs" : [{ "stages" : [ { "$match" : { "name" : { "$var" : "n" } } },{ "$group" : { "_id" : "$name","avg_age" : { "$avg" : "$age" }} } ],
                "type" : "pipeline","uri" : "example-pipeline"}]}' $BASE_URL/v3/meta/{db}/{collection}

Here is an example response:

.. container:: foldable

     .. code-block:: json

        TODO

**Execute an Aggregation**

TODO


With CURL:

.. code-block:: plaintext

        $ curl -v -X POST -H "Content-Type:application/json"  -H "X-Tapis-Token:$jwt" -d '' $BASE_URL/v3/meta/

Here is an example response:

.. container:: foldable

     .. code-block:: json

        TODO

**Delete an Aggregation**

TODO


With CURL:

.. code-block:: plaintext

        $ curl -v -X POST -H "Content-Type:application/json"  -H "X-Tapis-Token:$jwt" -d '' $BASE_URL/v3/meta/

Here is an example response:

.. container:: foldable

     .. code-block:: json

        TODO